we're gonna
get right on with our next presentation
I'm going to introduce Peter hershberg
who's our board chair at gray area and
also has been a great help in the sort
of
conceptualization and construction of
this exhibition as a the touch on a lot
of the pieces in the mcluhan exhibition
in particular particularly
and he will be giving a quick framing
presentation and then we will bring in
uh Han solork obrist who's the artistic
director at Serpentine Galleries and
Paula Antonelli who's a senior curator
in the design and architecture
department at MoMA New York as well as
the founding director of their research
and development program
are we ready I'm ready are you ready are
we ready
all right I warmed them up for you since
we're gathered here in the Cathedral of
mcluhan why don't we start by going back
to 1967 as he presages where we are
today
and
naturally it is the the medium that is
dictating what we're doing uh because
we're getting this to work 1976 he was
on The Today Show there had been a
debate between Ford and Carter I'm ready
to go when you are
the sound stopped for 10 minutes and
they asked about this he explains it was
the Revenge of the medium against the
bloody message because the debate was
ridiculous okay now we can start
there's no audio playing
the artist is always a jump ahead of
technology and is engaged really in
giving you images of what sort of
effects it's likely to have upon you
later on uh pop art simply tells you
the only art form left for you today is
your own natural environment you have
now to program it as if it were a an art
a work of art and an environment so to
certainly be confronted with the need to
use the human environment itself as art
form is one way of drawing attention to
the fact that the new environments
created by New Media require a certain
amount of human programming and control
for our psychic life
that was from a 1967 piece that he did
uh am I okay or do I have to mute
something
all right good good uh well you know the
reason we're doing this show is just an
early warning is we're really taking a
look at the Strategic role of the Arts
in helping move Society forward uh
because too often they're dismissed it's
just something pretty as opposed to a
real partner in developing technology or
culture this of course was the origin of
the distant early warning newsletter
that mcluhan did and the reason we're
doing our show it's interesting to go
back and ask where did mcluhan get this
from how did it rise in the 20th century
1934 Ezra Powell writes the ABCs of
reading and in it he writes artists are
the antenna of the race
oh we're going to go back and do
something
are we adding comes over
okay I'll just continue here artists are
the antenna of the race so so so Cloud
basically says who pays attention this
is right next to can you be interested
in the writings of men whose perceptions
are below average but this this hit
mcluhan another big influence on mcluhan
was was Wyndham Lewis uh who actually
said you know the Earth has become a
giant giant village but it was a Lewis
who also saw that with technological
changes our society who we were as
beings might be changing uh mcluhan
starts up a correspondence with power
it's not clear the pound was reading but
mcluhan after being in graduate school
in 34 is now a professor and he has now
declared himself having watched this
media environment that he will be an
intellectual Thug
uh who has slowly been accumulating in
private Arsenal with every intention of
using it in a Mindless age every insect
takes on the character of a lethal
weapon and then he even goes on and
talks about radio and Print in his day
and he says that those things are
hypnotizing us putting us in a spell
there's radio and news and commercials
he wants to work on that problem the
word is the cheapest and most universal
drug so what we've been talking about
now how media can control us represent
power environments he's decided this is
what he has to do and in that same
letter he refers to Wyndham Lewis who
wrote some really provocative stuff and
he goes you know everybody of Goodwill
in society is just dismissed uh Windham
Lewis writes his piece and the impact
was nil we resent or we ignore elections
and if you were like Roger McNamee or uh
uh Yael eisenstadt in Facebook or
Francis Hagin trying to blow a whistle
when people weren't listening to who to
you you would sympathize with mcluhan
early in his career when he saw that
there was not intelligent criticism
going on
of course by 64 he writes understanding
media and that's the year that he starts
talking about art as a distant early
warning signal by the way by 65 Tom Wolf
writing about him asked the fundamental
question what if he's right what if he
sounds like the most important thinker
since Newton Darwin Freud Einstein or
Pavlov right so he was on this kind of
rocketing a plane uh because he knew how
to communicate but I want to ground Us
in what it was like in the 1960s in the
middle of the Cold War when he uses this
distant early warning metaphor because
that was about the thing that was on
people's minds the most it was a
powerful way for him to connect up what
artists did and his own warnings
oh this by the way is what the distant
early warning line looked like it was a
bunch of antennas up in the north that
would basically tell us what's going on
that then got fed into a computer that
would help make decisions
[Music]
what was once the impassable Arctic
now provides the quickest routes for
attack from a wide sector of Europe and
Asia
[Music]
be set by the nightmare of this threat
the nation's leaders decided on a
tremendous undertaking
this was to build with the cooperation
of Canada a radar early warning Line
North of the Arctic Circle
starting at the northernmost tip of
Alaska
it would stretch 3 000 miles across the
continent to Baffin Island opposite
Greenland
distant early warning line they named it
new line it became
it is to meet this threat that the Air
Force has been developing stage the
Senate automatic ground environment
system to strengthen our air defenses
this new computer built to become the
nerve center of a defense network is
able to perform all the complex
mathematical problems involved
encountering a mass enemy raid it is
provided with its own Powerhouse
containing large diesel driven generator
air conditioning equipment
and cooling towers required to cool the
thousands of vacuum tubes in the
computer
the combination of the early warning
system in the computer cost more than
the Manhattan Project consumed about a
quarter of all the programmers in the
country uh it was a major focus and so
mcluhan used that same early warning
metaphor uh in his work and then in 1968
launches a newsletter for leaders in
Industry basically saying uh you know
the government's paying attention what
Soviets are doing no one's paying
attention to what we're doing to
ourselves with New Media you should
understand and the language he uses is
great he says his newsletter will be
shocking startling a monthly early
warning system for our era of instant
change and it's written for
the man or woman of responsibility who
cannot afford to be wrong in his
evaluation of the present or prediction
of the future it's designed to reveal
and analyze the vast underground
transforming forces you must deal with
in the dazzling Different World of
Tomorrow uh the the disruption and
concern of that era very similar to the
moment that we're in today and then the
language he uses to alarm people into
subscribing which of these dangerous
signals have you already interpreted
falsely which of these technological
breakthroughs are completely hidden from
your view then he kind of goes through
what's going on today his and you can
see a lot of this in the exhibit his
newsletter uh then highlighted many many
things uh including the role of the Arts
as antenna uh arts and copyright arts
and fraud he
I actually think he presaged nfts in in
some of the stuff
um
we were very fortunate to get a hold of
a recording that Marshall mcluhan made
with Tony Schwartz who was both very
closer into Marshall MCL fluent and a
mentor of mine uh who actually recorded
Tony talking about the artist uh in the
early 70s and I want to share some of
that with you today we've compressed it
in a format that mcluhan and Tony
Schwartz developed called demonic speech
where we kind of overlay things so that
they pour into you in acoustic space as
opposed to the linear print world the
only person who dare encounter the
unknown the new directly the Gorgon can
we uh volume up the only person who dare
encounter the unknown the new directly
the Gorgon without a mirror is the
artist artists in any age are experts in
direct encounter with the press and they
report their probings and findings in
all sorts of grotesque designs what the
pop artists are telling us is that the
environment itself has now become a work
of art that is a direct probe of the new
electronic situation understand the
process by which you got trapped and
you're out the artist is the only person
who is prepared to face the press and
therefore to tell us about the future
because our friend uh father Falcon's my
friend Jerry Fagen sales the future of
the future is the present this is always
true but very few people dare look at
the presence I don't think it I don't
think it comes easy to people in any
period never heard of anybody except
artists who could do it and uh the
artist does it because he's prepared to
use his senses as scientific instrument
instead of just using them as pickup
devices for his own satisfaction he is
engaged in a critique of satisfaction
he's willing to put aside or reject all
satisfaction in order to discover and
probe this kind of came to a head in
1969 uh uh Methuen goes to the
Bilderberg conference which is King CEOs
heads of state and uh um uh it it turns
out he went over like lead Bloom because
they basically didn't understand what he
was talking about and he concluded that
because it isn't an artistic training
they did not have an antenna they
couldn't sense was going on and then he
says the great advantage of going here
here is it gives me a way of estimating
the level of incompetence to which the
world leaders have attained Every Man
Has a right to protect his ignorant but
these are the ones responsible for
dealing with a changing world and uh
this kind of shows you the degree to
which he was ahead of people in the
power establishment wasn't that happy
I'm going to show one more Slide by the
time we get out towards the end of his
life
1979. he begins to realize that we're
moving into this completely electronic
environment that will change us uh kind
of kind of hooks up with someone's ideas
here here's the last public lecture that
he gave uh in which he's actually
thinking about the service environment
of these new technologies and then we're
going to go to our panel
any new service environment such as that
created by Railways or motor cars or
Telegraph or radio deeply modify the
very nature and image of the people who
use them
radical changes of identity happening in
very sudden brief intervals of time have
proved more deadly and destructive to
human values than were wars fought with
Hardware weapons and the electrogates
the alternate alteration of human
identity by new service environments of
information have left whole populations
without personal or Community Values to
a degree that far exceeds the effects of
food and fuel and energy shortages
that was very very impressive okay that
was 1979. why don't we bring up our
panel now of Paula Antonelli and Hans
Ulrich coming up
and there's Paula and do we have Hanz
over he will be joining us shortly hello
Paula child feeder ciao
um hey I wanted to start with the fact
you are the head of design at the Museum
of Modern Art which I'm not I'm not the
head of design you are the yeah and I
senior curator I'm not really that
curatorial architecture and design thank
you you lead a lot of the design efforts
the Museum of Art but you also gave
yourself this title of the head of r d
and yeah that suggests that there's a
role for the artists and for
institutions that's well beyond
Aesthetics and helps Drive change can
you explain how that fits in
definitely so it in 2008 as we all know
there was a big financial crisis and um
you know I had been at Mama already for
quite a few years but before switching
to architecture I had studied economics
for a while so I had come to understand
a little more of that world besides what
you read hi answer it besides what you
read in the business pages of the
magazines and newspapers so when 2008
happened I saw an opportunity for a
cultural institution to prove how
important and necessary they were for
society you know usually whenever
there's a crisis all governments always
look to the financial sector to the
industrial sector for rescuing Society
right too big to fail too important to
fail too fast to fail whatever you say
and instead the cultural sector is the
first that goes that gets cut you know
heads roll and all of a sudden it's the
superfluity art is the purpose to
society in 2008 I thought that Financial
the financial sector of Thailand finally
had revealed its true colors and we
could see an opportunity there so I
remember going to glenlar Instagram we
can do it let's open a department that
shows proofs to the world that museums
and cultural institutions can be the RND
of society they can provide the kind of
slow progress that is Dependable you
know like slow food it's about nurturing
local talent and then spreading to the
world it's about generosity it's about
Collective action it's about everything
that we need right now to get ourselves
out of this hole and of course you know
at that time we could not start a new
Department because we were all taking
pay cuts so it's not to lay off anyone
but we waited and then we started this
department which you know we can talk
about it later but it's the 10th
anniversary of the MoMA R D Salon series
which is the one that in a way tries to
prove the idea that that art artists
curators and the whole ecosystem and
bio-dome that is that is inside a museum
and around it can help Society really
deal with important matters at hand
including death being aging including
war and you know this is for us in
Silicon Valley this is a vital thing
because as we've seen
um it's very easy for stuff to get built
without a moral compass without the kind
of experimentation that artists might do
without that play as a Guiding Light and
I think that's one of the reasons we're
doing what we're doing here uh houns are
up welcome
and we're now going to work on hounselor
Works audio but we're doing great so far
um there we go
welcome uh why is thundering so 100
lyric as you know uh we've been having
this convening on distant early warning
and we've been looking at the mechanisms
by which mcluhan realized that artists
had the antenna and the sensibility to
both understand where we were going and
also the ability to kind of think and
Forge for us and I know that you as a
curator have been using this metaphor a
great deal and I'm wondering if you
could paint for us do we see this mostly
at work in emerging artists do you see
this in artists and residents in
companies like is is this working today
or are there things that we need to push
further to kind of make sure this
mentality is part of our society
yeah thank you it's a great uh pleasure
and honor to participate in your uh in
your in your great conference and I
wanted to begin actually with two models
from the time of mcluhan actually which
were a great inspiration for us at the
sermon in one is uh of course BD
Cleveland's experiment in Arts and
Technology and a couple of years ago I
went to visit Lillian Schwartz and I few
years earlier when he was still alive I
also met Petey Cleveland of course the
idea of such long duration collaboration
where artists who literally have offices
in a company like Bell Laboratories the
leading Tank Company at the time it's
something which for us at the southern
town was very inspiring and we thought
actually about 10 years ago we spent
because you know how colon actually from
eat go to need you know a sort of start
new experiments in in art and technology
and we started for this reason with a
tax department at the serpentine to also
not only actually produce work I mean we
are working with several artists on
actually uh on games the idea that
actually artists can now of course more
and more uh invent their own or work on
their own games with a more
accessibility of game engines but also
the idea of research to actually within
an institution do research we started
recently the synthetic ecologist lab we
explore's relationship between natural
and artificial biological system and
this is entire department which involves
several curators Alex Boyd Summer Clark
Brown Victoria Ivanova Eva Diego and Kay
Watson we developed this uh this
research projects the second inspiration
so from E to need to Second inspiration
comes from a UK example from the same
time as mcluhan and that's of course the
APG
the artist placement group idea of John
Latham and Barbara Stephens Barbara
civil close friends of mine when I moved
to England initially in the 90s and then
again when I joined the southern 2006
um and we worked with them several times
they were also at the Museum in Paris
and this idea of APG were actually
artists would also have a seat at the
table where decisions are made and the
one would actually bring out into
society
um seems uh more important now than
everyone is something which is very
important for us at a certain time to
not only do purchases artists within The
Art institution but to every day think
about how these contents and these
projects can actually enter Society how
can we bring them into society but later
and stabini in their wonderful APG idea
which at the time was sort of considered
to be your topic but I think today can
easily be seen as a concrete Utopia we
can actually realize was that they
wanted every Corporation every company
every brand also every government
structure has an artist in Residence and
eventually also an artist on on the
board
um are you satisfied that as artists
have become part of this power structure
that they're being heard uh and
influencing
um because one of the big you know we
see good examples of this for example
when Google uh was expounding with deep
dreams they were fascinated for artists
bang against that black box to see what
was going on and we did an event with
that here but there are many other
things that I think have come out
recently where ethicists and biologists
say are consulted and the artists are
treated you know a little bit more
preciously I'm wondering how you see
that going and how we can push that
yeah I think it's important to uh to
further push it because you need you
know many companies still don't do it at
all and uh
um uh but obviously at the moment when
also with the um I mean another aspect
of our work besides the uh work with
technology is of course that we work
very strongly uh with environmental
issues we have a whole department also
uh for Ecology and
um and the idea for example is our back
to Earth Project is there again to kind
of uh actually not only do projects at
The Gallery at the in our you know
console in our exhibition space but I
also bring these artists campaigns
environment campaigns uh into society
and of course
um definitely there is so much more
still to be done but there is more
openness now I think at this very moment
because more and more companies realize
that they have to Pivot and
um and of course that gives a necessity
also to bring different voices into
um into the into the company so so we
think it's a very good one but I think
also then Justice APG idea is also just
about new alliances I think we can only
solve the big challenges of the 21st
century the big dangers in in technology
in the environment also if we go beyond
the fear of putting knowledge and Isabel
staying as one of the Belgian
philosopher and the scientists one of
the scientists in the application I've
written a book which is uh called
um uh nouveles Alliance no new alliances
and I think we need to create alliances
uh collaborations between different uh
institutions uh in the outward outside
the art world and only that can actually
you know bring bring that change and of
course these alliances are happening in
a very interesting way in the space of
gaming it brings us in a way to our most
recent Focus really on uh on video games
and in 2021 2.8 billion people and
that's a third of the world population
have actually played video games and
that makes this Niche Pastime into
somehow the biggest Mass phenomenon of
our time and that of course means also
that something Anna entropy in the
wonderful book she wrote actually the
rise of the video game Genesis it's
exactly it's interesting because this
book came out exactly 10 years ago Anna
entropy wrote what I want from video
games is the plurality of voices among
games to come from a wider set of
experiences and present by the range of
perspectives I can imagine uh you're
invited to imagine with me you all are
invited to mention with me about Bishop
games are not manufactured for the same
small audience but one actually which
games are awesome by you and me for the
benefit of our peers and of course and
of course artists contribute very
strongly
until the plurality of uh of voices and
different perspectives by actually
producing and distributing their own
games and so we started for example we
work with Gabriel Masa now at the
serpentine on a game and I also uh
curated this year an exhibition which
began in Dusseldorf and Julia Starship
collection where it is still ongoing for
the next sort of 40-50 months uh and
then in Spring
we do in France
building in Max will actually show
another version of this exhibition and
the idea is also that the exhibition
will continue to grow and continue to to
evolve and I think one of the things
which is also important in the current
scheme of things is that
um is that we think about how we can go
beyond
um the short-termism of of event culture
now of conferences of exhibitions and
and think about uh and and all these
basically event
exhibitions and how we can actually
think about more long durational formats
projects on which we brought for many
years which continue to evolve and grow
and of course games very often they are
launched because they're even finished
feedback and then they can evolve over
many years and I think that's true for
many digital artworks they have a very
different time Horizon often than
exhibitions and I think it's interesting
to think about that not only in the
digital world but also in the analog
world now we we think for example about
many artists right now who decide that
they they'd rather think about Gardens
than about exhibitions and of course the
garden has a completely different time
Horizon than an exhibition and it's also
not the coincidence that there is this
fascinating pattern right now that you
see I have disability in the following
of you know someone like John Franco
baruchello who is now in his 90s the
Italian artist who since the 60s has
started an agricultural Association and
works actually as a with a farm as an
artist and it's interesting but right
now
and also in casual nibare independently
of each other I have actually decided to
do Farms Farm projects farming projects
in in Nigeria and of course I was very
fascinated
um uh by Paola by your book uh you did
with Alice Ross on
first of all you're amazing online
activities throughout the lockdown and
now the book where the emergency we can
really see uh thanks to your book so
many examples for such projects which
are not events but which are long
durational design projects so the same
happens not only in art but as we can
see through your wonderful book also in
in design if we just put a bookmark
there and then I want to go to both of
you we've got several things on the
table here one is both of you have just
mounted major shows on video games which
really then take us into the metaphors
and living in an interactive space the
space we've designed kind of coming from
a clue and that's where we live what's
that doing to us so I would love to hear
from Apollo and from both of you on both
of your big exhibitions there and then
you've also pointed out that
increasingly we realize we need
biological systems uh they're more
efficient they're regenerative so you
know Paulie you've had shows on this
hanzoork you've just brought that up and
you mentioned uh Apollo's book uh uh
design emergency which was really how
artists responded very entrepreneurially
in a distributed way during the pandemic
because nobody kind of knew what to do
and so why don't we start with that you
catalog a phenomenon that went on there
it really points out the poorest borders
between art and getting things done in
the world
so does that emergency happen very very
organically thank you so much I'm sorry
and Peter for bringing it up so
um I was stuck in New York in lockdown
with my husband Larry and we were just
like both dumbfounded and Larry was
listening every night to uh Fat Joe the
hip-hop artist who was having this great
uh Instagram lives with all his friends
that would last for hours and one day
Larry said you know you could do that
I'm like well I could do that I could do
it with Alice and Alice is the foremost
design critic in the world and she's
been my friend for 20 plus years and
we've been uh we've been together
partners with many different you know
conferences and support but we had never
started a project together and Alice has
an incredible Instagram feed on design
that she started many years ago that is
basically an encyclopedia of design and
every day gives you fundamental vitamins
and nutrients of design and she had
already started a whole series on the
pandemic so I called her up let's do it
we had a title in 10 minutes then we
called another friend fricker who's a
fabulous graphic designer and we had an
identity in three days and then we were
Off to the Races but what we did is we
started interviewing the designers
accidental designers of professional
designers that had a direct impact or
influenced in the pandemic starting from
for instance Alisa Eckert who's one of
the two illustrators at the Center for
Disease Control at the CDC in Atlanta
that gave the coronavirus its branding
you know the coronavirus is a great blob
with dots around it and they are the
ones that made it with Dave Higgins and
at least Eckert they made it into this
deep water mine you know really menacing
with that with the red as proteins so
something really that could scare the
world or we interviewed
um you know we interviewed the
anesthesiologist from bologna that is
response possible for for Designing the
split ventilator valve there were also
efforts here in New York at Cornell
Hospital in many places in the world but
in typical Italian fashion the
anesthesiologist had a friend who had a
little company near bologna that made
plastic objects so in like 24 hours they
had the valve and so on and so forth we
interviewed all of these people that
were contributing and then we had
specials for other tragedies that
happened from the Beirut last to the
um to the fires in California and it
became this living and breeding portrait
of what whatever is going on in the
world because as we know very well
emergencies are connected to each other
in many different ways and there's a
complex system behind it and it became
really ongoing then it became a special
issue of wallpaper and from that came a
whole book and we keep going and
evolving we we moved slightly from the
focus on the pandemic to a focus on the
world on making the world a better place
you know because we've been talking
about this long-term long duvet projects
and Han Solo mentioned them they're so
important and it's it's very funny
because there are many references to
that in the in the world of art but I I
often think of slow food you know as a
way to really explain it to the world
right you really need to think long term
and maybe one of the best things to
convince everybody of the need for this
long term is to think of food systems
and artists and my ambition is to
explain to as many people as possible
that design is not embellishment it's
not something that you put together at
the end like a ribbon but it's rather
part of the DNA of life and something
that you encounter every time you move
breathe look around your house or take
any action and therefore should be taken
more seriously and we always look for
opportunities for that to happen so
thinking of food as a metaphor is very
important because because you need to
reach people where it really feels to
them and that's why also video games are
powerful you know so there are these
actions that transcend the world of
design or transcend the world of art
artists and are often considered by a
popular culture removed and in Ivory
Towers designers are considered either
problem solvers or embellishers and we
all Thrive tools that we've seen as
Citizens that are fundamental to the
Destinies of society so so this is how
design emergency evolved and happened
and the feed is still online
design.emergency will keep on feeding it
and and we're thinking of very different
platforms many different platforms on
which to carry on our search so
then there's everything that else that
you asked but we can address it
according to how you moderate I want to
ask you both about uh both never alone
your show and we're all building yours
Hans Zurich but you mentioned food and I
want to throw an interesting thing on
the table of course a big theme on the
conference here has been the role of
machine learning and AI uh in visual art
yesterday we spent time on that in music
with yacht and also going on in San
Francisco is a lot of work in synthetic
biology in the future of food
um and and people are realizing you can
synthesize flavors uh and new new kinds
of proteins but you need an artist to
tell you if it's any good these artists
tend to be called chefs right so we see
this tight relationship between the bio
world and chefs and figuring things out
but then people started wondering if we
did use lots of chefs as training data
maybe we could automate the creation of
these new foods and flavors and the same
set of acceleration and perhaps
extraction that we see going on in Dali
and in other areas may come to synthetic
biology so in a way we see it across the
board of Technologies just showing up on
the radar
thought I'd put it out there to you
I think luckily the fact that it's food
will damp down a little bit this whole
like oh yeah let's like throw it to the
wall and see if it sticks because food
ultimately is directly and immediately
for the people so there's going to be
kind of a reality check
um but you know synthetic biology is not
something that happens today in Silicon
Valley and that chefs are brought in
into Silicon Valley to judge me it's
been going on for a really long time and
in 2008 there was this exhibition called
design and elastic mind where we showed
biodesigners the biggest lab was at
University of Western Australia at Perth
it was called symbiotic Islands or on
cats and you're not sure so these
experiments have been going on for a
while flavors definitely improved and
also applications and textures improved
um it's you know it's like I remember
tasting once upon a time a chip of a
synthetic meat and it was pretty
disgusting and now it's getting better
but I think that the applications that
are most most interesting you know
hansurik and I have seen this world of
biodesign go from ideas to embryonic
startups to Now Products and in fashion
you see a lot of it which is quite
amazing so yeah the food industry will
get there but because food is so
directly involving people's tastes it's
really it's it's a little more
complicated we're going to table this
for another conference because it's such
a rich thing let's talk about both of
your shows we just spent the last two
years accelerating into the virtual
world living virtually and your show uh
never alone came out it's taken from a
video game with kind of a a girl
exploring a design or an environmental
catastrophe but it takes a hopeful view
tell us a little bit about that and
how's work I know you saw that recently
I'd love to hear both of your thoughts
on the role of games here a lot of the
exhibits or a lot of things we've seen
here at gray area are people creating
and experimenting with identity and
Futures in the fluid game environment in
which some of the artists prefer to live
in
well maybe why don't you start talking
about World building because I have a
connection between game and something
else so if I go second it's going to do
it better let's talk about World
building okay guys I mean um and it's
interesting just what you said about
food and you know also
um uh I think uh really fascinating a
connection to to biology because this is
really would be a great topic for a
future kind of conference or dialogue we
could have because we are working
actually at the serpentine on the
synthetic ecologist lab which really
looks into National artificial
biological system it is a collaboration
with yasama and Sherry who is uh
actually the Project Director and
sometimes synthetic ecology lab
principle you know investigator and then
of course the connection to food plays a
big role also in our
um uh yeah in our back to Earth Project
because we work with cooking sections uh
and uh cooking sections have a very
direct impact on the menu of our
restaurant
um uh and that again is the APG idea
because we connected binugo we have not
only the southern restaurants but many
other restaurants in the UK and cooking
sections and you know the the projects
of the artists are now part of the
minister it would be exciting to talk
about that with Martha but today as you
suggest we talked ma about gaming and I
think I mean you mentioned mcluhan
initially and uh of course when the
early alarm system clue announces us
that art as a radar environment takes on
the function of indispensable perceptual
training and I discovered business
namjoon Pike when I visited Pike in 2000
um who told me about the necessity
actually for technology to liberate the
poetic and Intercultural capacities
um and and of course today
um we have a totally new generation of
artists who you know hopefully liberates
Innovative Intercultural capacities of
Technology of our time and gaming I
think plays a really crucial role in
what park called the the the poetic and
Intercultural and I thought it was
interesting is because I you know make
Studio visits every day
a lot on Zoom uh and of course regularly
also uh actually uh you know by visiting
the studios and and I realized that more
and more artists are inventing their own
games and of course the aesthetic of
games first entered into artistic
practice already decades ago as we can
see also in paola's exhibition I was
very fascinated by this aspect also of
of memory because it's not because I
think we have more information with
technology we necessarily have more
memory as Eric hopsbaum who wrote the
short Sentry and many other amazing
books always told me uh the protest
against forgetting is particularly
necessary you know in this space of
Technology where there might be Amnesia
somewhere at the very cost or very
fascinated by uh the memory Dimension
also of power let's show because of
course artists have integrated the
visual language of video games into
their works very early on and we also
started just a lot of exhibition and the
maths onto Papito exhibition with that
we started these artists who have
appropriated modified and subverted
existing video games in order to reflect
them also as addictive no more right to
turn them into something completely else
and the inventor sort of thought the
examples of that to be started and start
the event is very early on uh done that
uh of course also uh Jody and then in
the 2000s something like Korea so we
have whole section which looks into that
then of course the second aspect is that
actually
um artists have presented critique of
games by exposing the often
discriminatory elements instead of
typical depictions uh that's a whole
other chapter in the show with uh David
Blandy for example that will be an
example for that and then of course
there is artists who go into these games
to actually use them also as a platform
uh that's a I would say a third
possibility we can see a lot recently in
music Ariana Grande for example with
fortnite because Alia with valenciaga
and of course also the project we did
with the serpentine earlier this year
with cars and fortnite and the cute well
in fortnite the serpentine was basically
um the southern dynast Gallery was built
in the gaming space on the landing page
which means that 10 to 50 million people
every day
were in contact with the serpentine
there's a lot of visitors in that sense
for an actual 150 million we've never
had as many visitors and then of course
it also meant that because the same
exhibition happened also in the gallery
physically that all of a sudden business
who never would have visited an
exhibition space before and also a much
younger audience actually came to see
the exhibition so that's another option
then of course the first and certainly
main part of the exhibition uh is this
uh aspect that I mentioned before it
actually out is invent their own video
games and that gave the show also the
title this idea of World building and I
mean Daniel bracelet Charlie says uh to
quote Daniel here I think building
worlds digitally these are their work
gives you the chance to think about the
foundations that you are constructing on
I often build on top of the world's
images videos and sounds of black Trans
people to ensure that their history is
the foundation of the world I'm building
so that it will be able to hold the
stories they they want to tell and so I
think that's a really important aspect
of World building Gabriel Mason talks
about the dynamization of Human
Experience the diversifying and
broadening of our relations to the world
it's very pleasant idea that we can put
worlds into contact with birds through
games k-okaya TV is another Young artist
in our exhibition who is building
browsers that he feels that this is a
shared Vision between actually many
different people that games have been
creating the metaverse for a while now
and that's that's of course another I
think really interesting aspect that
video games have been frontlining in a
way this whole discussion which now has
become so present with the methods
having spent decades already developing
prototyping and also operationalizing
the Technologies for the creation of
hybrid digital physical experiences that
actually involve totally into action
often participation avatars digital
spatial experiences that are seemingly
Unlimited in scale and Imagination also
the facilitation of multi-party
real-time interactions with other users
and the digital experiment that comes
from our technology report and actually
game Technologies are in that sense
becoming the fundamental infrastructure
for for the metabolous in a way and I
think it's interesting if you think
about these uh this idea also of
participation because of course a lot of
the installations are also in World
building are mixed realities they are
and I think that's something we've been
seeing a lot in in artists working with
video games that they've worked on on
mixed reality kind of installation cake
and is is such an example they've done a
very very complex installation with very
very you know physical parts digital
parts and so on and so on so so that's
that's I think another thing the future
being somehow May mixed reality
uh but I don't find really beautiful
about the ecosystem of curation that
exists is that hansurik and I have are
dealing with the same raw material but
then looking at it from very different
sides because Han solric's exhibition
which I have not seen yet and I really
hope that I can get to it very soon it
is about artists use interpretation
inhabitation and in in in envisaging of
video games and instead the one at MoMA
is really more about the bass line it's
about the design of video games and it's
about the collection so you see here a
curator in a collecting institution a
curator instead in coastal and working
with other collections it's fascinating
because it gives you different angles
the um never alone is a collection shop
so it comes from the collection of video
games and other interactive design of
the Museum of Modern Art it's a
collection that we started in 2010 and
after working on it for three years
because once again when normal moves it
moves with like Usain each and with
elephant feet slowly deliberately
knowing what it's doing so we had a
whole committee we made a checklist we
we kind of like wrote the criteria to
collect video games this interactive
design and we started with a collection
of 36 and of these 36 they're all on
display in these galleries uh some as
gameplay some as actual playable games
and they range from some Classics I mean
their Sac man of course there's Tempest
and there's Minecraft but then there's
also some indie games I wouldn't call
them artist games there are artists
games in moma's collection like 10
members Long March but those are in the
other departments we have for instance
in Indie Games by Bennett vardy or a
game called this war of Mine by 11
Studios that shows
um and it resonates a lot with what's
going on in Ukraine right now it's a war
game where instead of being a soldier
shooting one is a civilian trying to
stay alive in a city under siege or
there's another video game that's called
papers please in which the player is a
border agent that has to decide in a few
minutes whether to give political Asylum
or not to an individual in front of them
so they are video games
um we we consider them as design meaning
that we look at some criteria that range
from of course form of course function
then space and time because there's this
like moving and filmic nature to video
games but also especially to the design
of behaviors and how the interaction
between mind body and machine happens so
it's this different angle which in the
end and leads us to the same path that
that Hans zurich's exhibition leads us
to which is an idea of what play means
and what it can reveal of Life once
again you know it's about these
experiments for for the real world that
come from design and come from art what
does it mean to think of yourself
playing in a different universe and as I
Was preparing for this conversation
today and I realized that I'm moving
pretty fast so I I really exhort anybody
who's interested to go on the MoMA page
for never alone and and read more about
the exhibition and about the division
between video games and as designers art
but it made me realize that it really
goes back to process once again and to
uh what we were telling me Peter when we
were preparing not only about MacMillan
but also as a reference to Kennestone
back shines 1970 show information Nation
at normal which we all tend to go back
to the idea of revealing the process the
process of knowledge which can be
acquired by dialogue by play by research
by becoming really engaged in the world
and I think that that's what designers
and artists can teach everyone and I
wanted you know I have here one catalog
that hansource did of the exhibition
about ensomari at the Korean
um in Somali was this designer
unfortunately he passed away
um how many years three years ago he was
not able to see the exhibition that
Hansel Rick did of him at the trianala
he died like a few months before but he
was active for a really long time and I
always think of him in the same way that
I think of Kennestone right really Gruff
really brisk unless they liked you and
unless you needed them you were like a
child or you were in a position whereby
you saw they're not knowledge and all of
a sudden they opened like beautiful
flowers and gave you everything that
they had learned which was all about
process and that's what the information
exhibition was about it was about the
process of gaining information from
artists and on the world and I know that
I'm mixing so many different things
together but I believe that everything
that Hans Surat and I are doing is about
that there's this um yearning and also
Alice I mean all of the people that we
love and we Embrace this yearning to to
try and and make other people see what
we see because in our own way we have
something to contribute and also our
yearning to see the world the way other
people see and I think that that's what
artists could and designers could really
teach all of the uh rest of the world
including powers that be in corporations
and in government gaming of course oh go
ahead I have your catalog here found the
from the moment I have one too it's in
the back of the room
Albert I was going to point out that
gaming because it's built on very
sophisticated simulation engines in a
way is one of the few ways to expose
people to complex systems to
alternatives to the nature of
environment that's a big part of what
you're doing in um in ever Alone
um and I guess the the question I have
is that should be a powerful way to
change opinions or motivate society and
and I'm wondering if we're optimistic
about that and I'll leave you with this
question next week the New York Times
was having a climate conference here in
San Francisco and in um positioning the
conference they say uh technology has
transformed lives but in spite of many
promises it hasn't saved us from the
perils yet uh shifts in society often
come from art but will they be able to
mobilize change this time around I
thought it was amazing that they came to
San Francisco framed the climate
conference around art as the hope so I'd
love both of your thoughts on that as we
wrap up
I mean I understand why they came to San
Francisco
and is it gonna happen this time well I
think a very expensive idea of art as as
also I know how sorry does it's people
that are creative some some are Bonafide
artists with artists on the passport
others act like that but it's that idea
of imagination at the power or at least
the power to speak in convincing ways
that can do something I mean Greta
tomberg showed us and in a way uh hers
was by many and I said with tremendous
respect considered almost a performance
because it was not only the content it
was the way it was delivered that
stopped the world in its tracks right so
that kind of uh of unusual you know uh
intervention in the world is what can do
something what do you think I'm sorry
yeah I completely agree I think I mean
CT mcguyen wrote his book games agency
is Art and argues that games are kind of
unique art forms that offer alternative
experience of life and actually you know
offer also new forms of agency and I
think it's interesting to kind of
connect that
you know who talks about a
mission-driven economy I mean you know a
fabulous book and I do think that this
idea of actually mission-driven games uh
I mean if you think for example about
Luol Mayan's extraordinary game
um lu almaine grew up in a refugee camp
and has done this extraordinary game
which is actually very much not only
about this experience but also about
agency related to that and if you think
about many I think many games right now
also addressed of course the extinction
crisis environmental questions uh in
that sense are also Mission driven it
was fascinating for example also
interested often and from maths
horizontal property and for the static
exhibition to work with the Institute of
career ecology a fascinating Collective
which actually
very much focuses again on on on Mission
driven uh games so I think that's one
thing and I think in order to do so
um we need to go be beyond the fear of
pulling knowledge and when I was reading
your catalog this afternoon but I was
fascinating for example to revisit the
biophilia project no which is in your
show
um and that's such a wonderful example
how to actually put science to go beyond
the The Divide of two cultures with CP
snow lamented it starts with the
biologists about Wilson's and an idea of
biophilia and different looks at the
casting of this video I mean of this of
this project of this game it's of course
Bjork but it's also uh our friends
Matthias Augustine from m m they are
designers it's the novel is Sean with
whom I've worked a couple of years ago
who is an extraordinary novelist in
Eisen young Technologies like Max weisel
whom I know from 89 plus and and then
this is just a small path so I think
this idea also but
um uh there is this collaborative very
interdisciplinary collaborative nature
in terms of Gaming interesting and I
think the other aspect between us would
be interesting would be to see how it
actually connects
how we do bring together somehow also
the space of blockchain I mean for
example Sarah flin
and something pack also talks about in a
recent conversation we did by email with
Park this idea that actually a
blockchain space in the gaming space
could maybe merge and Sarah friend the
young German artist she has done these
very extraordinary sort of site-specific
works for for platforms the protocols
they're sort of software becomes a
sculptural medium and uh already in 2017
worked with a game which also had
blockchain elements to it and very much
questions are also this idea of uh of of
value and and is about generosity so
certain of Sarah friends works if they
cannot if they're not given to another
person they actually
um expire and I think that's of course
interesting I mean in relation also to
to to the beginning of how it all began
you know with the internet and I had
long conversations with Team banners Lee
uh last year about this idea of uh the
internet being for everyone and Tim
bernersley being very varied at the fast
internet will no longer be for everyone
and that's of course a lot of we can see
that in a lot of artists also that they
actually work with open source models of
games you know and if you think for
example an artist like like Sandra Perry
who is also in the exhibition for Sandra
it's very important that you know the
work has these open source Dimension
this is is accessible for everyone uh I
think that's that's another another
aspect thank you we are out of time but
clearly not out of the future or out of
the possibilities for further
conversation
um this has been terrific I wish you
guys were here uh the gray area Festival
four years ago was on blockchain and
distributed systems and exposed a lot of
stuff around privacy and the meaning of
money and remember back then we were
worried if we stuck that word in the
title would anybody come but that was
four years ago
and I just want to wrap up and telling
you one story 1983 I was teaching a
class to members of Congress about
Computing and Al Gore was the
Congressional Clearing House of the
future and I said why do you want to
hear about it you don't care about bids
or bods he goes no but someone says look
Congressman here's a report the ozone
hole will disappear what do we do about
it so we taught a class and we built
computer games around the environment
and around social security systems and I
remember showing this to Congress people
and none of their short-term things
worked and they're like we're really
glad we get elected every two years
because this long-term thinking thing
doesn't fit with what we do and okay
that stuck with me ever since
thank you very much we will continue
this uh in Europe in New York and here
thanks and back over to you Barry
thank you